I wrote this program in 1990 when CAD was starting to be employed and we
were using a CNC pipe bending machine. If was often found that we needed to
convert pipe shapes from 3 dimensional XYZ coordinates to YBC bend data and
vice versa. It was written in Quick Basic and runs as a DOS program or in a
Windows shell. It may be of use to someone else as it can be used to
calculate the true angle between any three coordinate points if required.
The graphical display leaves a lot to be desired but gives some idea of the
shape being looked at. I never bothered with an edit function as there is
only a small amount of data to be entered for any shape.

Typical uses would be for hand bending a pipe to suit a path that is
defined as coordinates such as may be obtained from a CAD drawing or hand
sketch. This will simplify those cases where the pipe shape is not flat but
is 3 dimensional and the calculations get tricky.

Since then we have upgraded our pipe bending machine and this program was
replaced with an Excel spread sheet that takes in coordinates and produces
bend data but not the other way round. It also checks for potential
problems with the bent part hitting the machine or not enough distance
between bends to allow tooling to grab the pipe for the next bend. I have
not included this spreadsheet as it is far more specialist in nature and
would not be of much use to other people.

If you feel that this program is worthy of inclusion on your web site
please feel free to add it to your list of free software. I think it runs
without any additional files being needed in the folder but I can't
remember for certain. It runs under XP as is.

Martin Connelly
Industrial Engineer
Siemens
Lincoln
UK

YBC are machine axes, translations are XYZ as most people know who have
mills with coordinate tables. The rotations about these axes are ABC. The
movements made by a pipe bending machine when making a bend are distance
between bends (DBB), plane of bend (POB) and degree of bend (DOB). The
distance between bends is produced when the machine moves along the Y axis,
the degree of bend is made by a rotation about the Y axis, B, and the bend
is a rotation about the Z axis, C. Hence YBC are CNC machine movements
required to produce a bend. The shape of a pipe can be defined as a
collection of DBB, POB and DOB but a small error in an angle at the
beginning can result in a large error at the other end. Alternatively a
pipe can be defined as a set of XYZ coordinates. These start at the end of
the pipe's centre line and are the intersections of the extended
centrelines of each straight section up to the other end.

A basic pipe may be an 8" straight, a 90 degree bend at 2" centre line
radius and another 8" straight. This is the form of YBC data. The same
parts as coordinates would start off as 0,0,0 - 0,10,0 - 10,10,0.  By
convention the first straight length goes along the Y axis and the first
bend is in the XY plane. The advantage of coordinates is that they can be
pulled straight out of CAD and the radius of the bend does not change the
pipe's overall shape or size. The disadvantage is that they are hard for
most people to visualise as they seem to be just a set of numbers.

What this program allows is for someone to create a pipe shape as a set of
coordinates in 3D then convert it into YBC data which will allow it to be
visualised or alternatively bent by hand.  Imagine you are building a small
steam engine and your pipe needs to go up 2", then right and up 1" and 1.4"
and then the last bend goes down,right and towards you 2",1" and 3". The
first bend is easy, 90 degrees and the distance to that first bend is also
easy, make it long and cut to length afterwards. But what about the
distance to the second bend? Its plane of bend and degree of bend are also
tough calculations. This program will turn out the bend data to make this
part first time with out a lot of trial and error.
